=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

mbank-cli - command-line interface to the on-line banking system of mBank

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over 2

=item *
B<mbank-cli> [B<list>] [I<option>...]

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<history> [I<option>...] [B<--from> I<start-date> [B<--to> I<end-date>] ] [B<--export> I<format>] {I<account> | B<-M> I<account>...  | B<-A>}

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<future> [I<option>...] {I<account> | B<-M> I<account>...  | B<-A>}

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<blocked> [I<option>...] {I<account> | B<-M> I<account>...  | B<-A>}

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<deposits> [I<option>...]

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<cards> [I<option>...]

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<funds> [I<option>...]

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<notices> [I<option>...]

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<logout> [I<option>...]

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<activate-profile> {B<personal> | B<business>}

=item *
B<mbank-cli> B<configure> [I<option>...]

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<mbank-cli> provides basic command-line interface to the online banking system of mBank.

It can use the following web interfaces:

=over 2

=item *
L<https://online.mbank.cz/>

=item *
L<https://online.mbank.sk/>

=item *
L<https://online.mbank.pl/>

=back

=head2 Output format

Records are separated by newline (0x0A, LF) characters.
Each line contains fields separated by tab (0x09, HT) characters.

All dates are in the I<YYYY>-I<MM>-I<DD> format.

=head2 Common options

The following options are available for all commands:

=over 4

=item B<--verbose>

Display the debugging information.

=item B<--debug> I<debug-directory>

Save the debugging information (including dumps of downloaded pages) into I<debug-directory>.

=item B<--config> I<config-file>

Use I<config-file> as the configuration file.

The default is to use
B<I<$>I<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>/mbank-cli/config>
(or B<I<$>I<HOME>/.config/mbank-cli/config>).

Please consult the B<FILES> section for the configuration file syntax.

=item B<--cookie-jar> I<cookie-jar-file>

Use I<cookie-jar-file> as the session cookie store.

Please consult the B<FILES> section for details.

=item B<--help>

Display help and exit.

=item B<--version>

Display version information and exit.

=back

=head2 Selecting accounts

Some commands (B<history>, B<future>, B<blocked>) can act on one or more accounts.
They can be selected in the following ways:

=over 4

=item I<account-name> (as a positional argument)

select a single account

=item B<-M>, B<--multiple-accounts> I<account>...

select multiple accounts

=item B<-A>, B<--all-accounts>

select all accounts

=back

The “B<*>” character can be used as a wildcard character.

=head2 The “list” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> [B<list>] [I<option>...]

For each account, print:

=over 4

=item Z<>

I<account-name> I<account-number> I<balance> I<avail-resources>

=back

Example:

    $ mbank-cli
    eKonto     03 1140 2004 0000 3902 0147 1002  4106.16 PLN  4082.79 PLN
    izzyKonto  03 1140 2004 0000 3902 0147 1045  1684.32 PLN  1684.32 PLN
    eMax       03 1140 2004 0000 3902 0147 3213  2436.98 PLN  2436.98 PLN
    eMax EUR   03 1140 2004 0000 3902 0147 1002  2384.36 EUR  2384.36 EUR

=head2 The “history” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<history> [I<option>...] [B<--from> I<start-date> [B<--to> I<end-date>] ] {I<account> | B<-M> I<account>...  | B<-A>}

Print the history of the selected account(s),
in the following format:

=over 4

=item Z<>

I<[account-name]> I<date> I<accounting-date> I<amount> I<balance> I<description>

=back

Newline characters in I<description> are replaced by tab characters.

Time range can be selected with the following options:

=over 4

=item B<--from> I<start-date>

Show operations since I<start-date>.

=item B<--from> I<start-date> B<--to> I<end-date>

Show operations from I<start-date> to I<end-date>, inclusive.

=back

Dates should be specified in the in the I<YYYY>-I<MM>-I<DD> format.

Examples:

    $ mbank-cli history eKonto
    2010-08-01  2010-08-02  -10.00 PLN  4106.16 PLN  OPŁATA ZA PROWADZENIE RACHUNKU  WYPŁATY ZE WSZYSTKICH ATM
    2010-08-01  2010-08-02  -22.00 PLN  4116.16 PLN  PODATEK OD ODSETEK KAPITAŁOWYCH
    2010-08-01  2010-08-01  107.89 PLN  4138.16 PLN  KAPITALIZACJA ODSETEK
    2010-07-30  2010-08-01   -5.00 PLN  4030.27 PLN  OPŁATA ZA MIES. ZESTAWIENIE OPER.

    $ mbank-cli history eKonto --from 2006-06-01
    [ history since 2006-06-01 ]

    $ mbank-cli history eKonto --from 2005-01-01 --to 2005-12-31
    [ history from 2006-06-01 to 2005-12-31 ]

As an alternative to the tabular format,
it is possible to export history as CSV, HTML or PDF:

=over 4

=item B<--export CSV>

=item B<--export HTML>

=item B<--export PDF>

=back

When the B<--export> option is in effect,
exactly one account must be selected.
Also, the standard output must not be a terminal,
but it should be redirected to a file.

Example:

    $ mbank-cli history eKonto --from 2013-01-01 --to 2013-12-31 --export PDF eKonto > history-2013.pdf

=head2 The “future” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<future> [I<option>...] {I<account> | B<-M> I<account>...  | B<-A>}

Print the list of planned operations for the selected account(s),
in the following format:

=over 4

=item Z<>

I<[account-name]> I<date> I<recipient> I<description> I<amount> I<status>

=back

Example:

    $ mbank-cli future eMax
    [ planned operations for the “eMax” account ]

=head2 The “blocked” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<blocked> [I<option>...] {I<account> | B<-M> I<account>...  | B<-A>}

Print the list of operations that were carried out but not booked,
in the following format:

=over 4

=item Z<>

I<[account-name]> I<registration-date> I<finalization-date> I<amount> I<description> I<type>

=back

Example:

    $ mbank-cli blocked eKonto
    [ blocking operations for the “eKonto” account ]

=head2 The “deposits” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<deposits> [I<option>...]

Print the list of time deposits,
in the following format:

=over 4

=item Z<>

I<deposit-name> I<deposit-type> I<establishment-date> I<maturity-date> I<term> I<interest> I<amount>

=back

Example:

    $ mbank-cli deposits
    Moja lokata  eMax lokata  2003-02-09  2004-02-09  12 miesięcy  4.00%  2500.00 PLN
    mLokata      mLokata      2004-03-09  2004-05-09  2 miesiące   4.00%  1200.00 PLN

=head2 The “cards” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<cards> [I<option>...]

Print the list of cards,
in the following format:

=over 4

=item Z<>

I<card-name> I<card-number> I<owner> I<amount>

=back

Example:

    $ mbank-cli cards
    ELECTRON EKONTO  1111 **** **** 5772  JAN WIRTUALNY  4082.79 PLN
    ELECTRON EMAX    1111 **** **** 2561  JAN WIRTUALNY  2436.98 PLN

=head2 The “funds” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<funds> [I<option>...]

Print the list of investment funds,
in the following format:

=over 4

=item Z<>

I<fund-name> I<amount> I<[planned-amount]>

=back

Example:

    $ mbank-cli funds
    SKARBIEC - III FILAR        2821.12 PLN
    Investor Zrównoważony FIO	   0.00 PLN  1000.00 PLN

=head2 The “notices” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<notices> [I<option>...]

Print the list of notices,
in the following format:

=over 4

=item Z<>

I<flag> I<date> I<title>

=back

I<flag> is either “B<N>” (for an unread notice) or an empty string (otherwise).

Example:

    $ mbank-cli notices
       2010-08-07  Odrzucony przelew
    N  2010-08-06  Odrzucone zlecenie nabycia FI

=head2 The “logout” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<logout> [I<option>...]

Log out from the web interface.

=head2 The “activate-profile” command

Syntax:
B<mbank-cli> B<activate-profile> {B<personal> | B<business>}

Activate the personal profile, or the business profile.

This is an experimental command.
It is provided only a stop-gap solution
until mbank-cli is taught to activate profiles automatically.

Examples:

	$ mbank-cli activate-profile personal  # activate the personal profile
	$ mbank-cli activate-profile business  # activate the business profile

=head2 The “configure” command

Create the configuration file interactively.

Example:

    $ mbank-cli configure
    Country (CZ, or SK, or PL): PL
    Login: 12345678
    Password: *************
    Encrypt password with GnuPG (y/n)? y
    Session cookie store: ~/.local/share/mbank-cli/12345678.cookies
    Configuration file: ~/.config/mbank-cli/config

    $ cat ~/.config/mbank-cli/config
    CookieJar ~/.local/share/mbank-cli/12345678.cookies
    Country PL
    Login 12345678
    # Password (encrypted):
    -----BEGIN PGP MESSAGE-----
    Version: GnuPG v1

    hIwDQI8Yo++6I7MBBACc44wKiYDUP7Ynw0PKbJuACSoXH96KL7a1O6o+442FfKb6
    w7YAV1YJ3GVfdXM7AR5IFwdMG4N63NS6gEW5c9yXJmoITyzkQxBrI4BEgjmxeo3h
    U1X4bdkUjHEaq99o0LvvbzvHSDydPsTC86MCfxD7H/ZaTysTYCLvc11n1RCs4NJK
    AYkxMBHKq6mEZD9F1U0zJcUhrYXwq7a2krGhlgDDiyBq/Ls4dZpwOqbGNXFa7Klk
    EQEJUNO3nxBIrY0T85/zmk8xk/W99IreWZ0=
    =Kt9S
    -----END PGP MESSAGE-----

=head1 EXIT STATUS

=over 4

=item Z<>0

Success.

=item Z<>1

Failure because of a user error.

=item Z<>2

Failure because of an HTTP error.
This may be due to a network error, but might as well be a result of a scraping error (see below).

=item Z<>3

Failure because of an unexpected behaviour of the web interface (so called “scraping error”).

=item Z<>4

Failure because of a system-related error or an I/O error.

=item Z<>255

Failure because of an internal error.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

The variable defines the base directory relative to which user specific configuration files should be stored.
If it is not set to an absolute path, B<I<$>I<HOME>/.config> is used instead.
Please consult the XDG Base Directory Specification for details.

This variable is used to determine default location of the configuration file.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

The variable defines the base directory relative to which user-specific data files should be stored.
If it is not set to an absolute path, B<I<$>I<HOME>/.local/share> is used instead.
Please consult the XDG Base Directory Specification for details.

The “B<configure>” command uses this variable to choose location of the session cookie store.

=item B<LC_ALL>, B<LC_CTYPE>, B<LANG>

These variables affect, amongst others, determine the interpretation of sequences of bytes as characters.
B<LC_ALL> overrides B<LC_CTYPE>, which overrides B<LANG>.
Please consult L<locale(7)> for details.

These variables are used to determine input and output encoding.

=item B<LC_I<*>>, B<LANG>

The “B<configure>” command uses the internationalization variables to guess the user's country.

=back

=head1 FILES

=head2 Configuration file

By default, configuration is read from
B<I<$>I<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>/mbank-cli/config>
(or B<I<$>I<HOME>/.config/mbank-cli/config>).
An alternative location can be specified with the B<--config> option.

The configuration file is a simple text file.
Empty lines are ignored.
Lines starting with the “B<#>” character are comments, and are ignored, too.
The remaining lines are I<key>-I<value> pairs:

=over 4

=over 4

=item CookieJar I<path>

Location of the session cookie store.

Each mBank user must use a separate file.
This is currently not enforced,
and there is no protection against accidentally using another user's file.

=item Country I<cc>

I<cc> is a two-letter country code:
B<CZ> (Czech Republic),
B<SK> (Slovakia), or
B<PL> (Poland).

=item Login I<login>

Z<>

=item Password I<password>

Z<>

=back

=back

Any part of the configuration file can be encrypted with GnuPG,
and will be automatically decrypted when needed.
It is recommended to encrypt only the password.
This is what the “B<configure>” command does.

=head2 Session cookie store (a.k.a. cookie jar)

Session cookies are stored on disk,
so that subsequent invocations of the program can reuse existing session,
instead of re-logging every time.

The file is not encrypted.
If keeping unencrypted session cookies on disk is not desirable,
set B<CookieJar> to B</dev/null> in the configuration file.

=head1 BUGS

Please report bugs at the L<issue tracker|https://code.google.com/p/mbank-cli/issues>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 2

=item *

L<gpg(1)>

=item *

L<XDG Base Directory Specification|http://standards.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/basedir-spec-latest.html>

=back
